feat(otelcol): add support for htpasswd file authentication (#3916)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.auth.basic.md

|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| [`client_auth`][client_auth]     | Configures client authentication credentials for exporters.                | no       |
| [`debug_metrics`][debug_metrics] | Configures the metrics that this component generates to monitor its state. | no       |
| [`htpasswd`][htpasswd]           | Configures server authentication using htpasswd format for receivers.      | no       |

[client_auth]: #client_auth
[debug_metrics]: #debug_metrics
[htpasswd]: #htpasswd

### `client_auth`

The `client_auth` block configures credentials that client extensions (such as exporters) use to authenticate to servers.

| Name       | Type     | Description                                        | Default | Required |
| ---------- | -------- | -------------------------------------------------- | ------- | -------- |
| `password` | `string` | Password to use for basic authentication requests. |         | yes      |
| `username` | `string` | Username to use for basic authentication requests. |         | yes      |

{{< admonition type="note" >}}

> When you specify both the `client_auth` block and the deprecated top-level `username` and `password` attributes, the `client_auth` block takes precedence and Alloy ignores the top-level attributes for client authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you specify both the `client_auth` block and the deprecated top-level `username` and `password` attributes, the `client_auth` block takes precedence and {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} ignores the top-level attributes for client authentication.
```

Missed this in my previous reviews. We use a product variable for the Alloy product name. The result is the same in the published docs.. just good to update this to the variable for consistency.

{{< /admonition >}}

### `debug_metrics`

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-debug-metrics-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

### `htpasswd`

> The `htpasswd` block configures how server extensions (such as receivers) authenticate incoming requests using the htpasswd format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `htpasswd` block configures how server extensions (such as receivers) authenticate incoming requests using the `htpasswd` format.
```

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}
```

#### Use htpasswd inline content

This example shows how to specify `htpasswd` content directly in the configuration:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    inline = "user1:password1\nuser2:password2"
  }
}
```

{{< admonition type="note" >}}

> To make the migration from the deprecated `username` and `password` attributes easier, you can specify both the deprecated attributes and the `htpasswd` block in the same configuration. Alloy appends the deprecated attributes to the `htpasswd` content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the migration from the deprecated `username` and `password` attributes easier, you can specify both the deprecated attributes and the `htpasswd` block in the same configuration.
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} appends the deprecated attributes to the `htpasswd` content.
```

}
```

### Authenticating requests for receivers

> 

Reviewer: Style-wise we should never have one heading follow another without some descriptive text between.

Maybe something like

`The following examples demonstrate how you can use username and password or an htpasswd file for basic authentication.`

> #### Use Username/Password
> This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use username and password

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a single
```

We should have a blank line between a heading and body text. 

Removed the `/` from the heading

Use sentence case in headings instead of initial caps.

username and password combination:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  } 
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  username = "demo"
  password = sys.env("API_KEY")
}
```

> #### Use htpasswd file
> This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using an htpasswd 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use htpasswd file

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using an htpasswd 
```

file containing the users to use for basic auth:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  } 
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}
```

> #### Combination of both
> This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a combination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Combination of both

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a combination
```

of both an htpasswd file and username/password. Note that if the username provided also exists in the htpasswd file, it 
takes precedence over the one in the htpasswd file:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  } 
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  username = "demo"
  password = sys.env("API_KEY")
  
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}

> ```
> 
> 
> [otelcol.receiver.otlp]: ../otelcol.receiver.otlp/

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

[otelcol.receiver.otlp]: ../otelcol.receiver.otlp/
````

Removed extra blank line

}
```

### Authenticating requests for receivers

> The following examples demonstrate how to perform basic authentication using either a username and password combination,
> the client authentication block, an htpasswd file or a combination of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples demonstrate how to perform basic authentication using either a username and password, the `client_auth` block, an htpasswd file. or a combination of these authentication methods.
```

Name the block, add a missing comma, and make it more explicit what "them" means in this context.

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "my-otlp-grpc-server:4317"
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  client_auth {
    username = "demo"
    password = sys.env("API_KEY")
  }
}
```

#### Use htpasswd file

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using an htpasswd 
file containing the users to use for basic auth:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}
```

#### Combination of both

> This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a combination
> of both an htpasswd file and username/password. Note that if the username provided also exists in the htpasswd file, it 
> takes precedence over the one in the htpasswd file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a combination of both an htpasswd file, and username and password.
If you specify the `username` argument and include the username in the htpasswd file, the `username` argument takes precedence.
```

I need some clarity on the second sentence. I tried to clarify the intent a but bit... I'm not sure I've got it right. 

I read this as... If the user provides a password arg and sets password in the htpasswd file, the password arg take precedence. Does this imply they can be different usernames? The original wording indicates (to me anyway) that they would be identical... and if they are the same, does it matter to the user that the arg take precedence? I can only see this being important if they would be different usernames... 

Also... is this sentence in the right place? It looks like it's important and maybe should be included in the `htpasswd` block information vs down in an example.

Author: This is basically the behavior of the upstream component.

 If for some reason you specify **the same user** both in the `.htpasswd` file and `inline`, the one that is `inline` takes precedence. Since in the case of specifying both the deprecated username and password combination and the htpasswd, we append the username and password to the inline block, it takes precedence over the rest. 

I think that as you suggested, this is an important enough information that should be moved to the htpasswd block instead.

}
```

### Authenticating requests for receivers

These examples show how to perform basic authentication using the `client_auth` block for exporters or the `htpasswd`
block for receivers.

#### Use client authentication

This example configures [`otelcol.exporter.otlp`][otelcol.exporter.otlp] to use basic authentication using a single
username and password combination

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "my-otlp-grpc-server:4317"
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  client_auth {
    username = "demo"
    password = sys.env("API_KEY")
  }
}
```

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
To migrate from the deprecated `username` and `password` attributes, move them into the `client_auth` block for client 
authentication.
{{< /admonition >}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To migrate from the deprecated `username` and `password` attributes, move them into the `client_auth` block for client authentication.
{{< /admonition >}}

```

#### Use htpasswd file

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using an htpasswd 
file containing the users to use for basic auth:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}
```

#### Use htpasswd inline content

> This example shows how to specify htpasswd content directly in the configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to specify `htpasswd` content directly in the configuration:
```

}
```

### Authenticating requests for receivers

The following examples demonstrate how to perform basic authentication using either a username and password, the 
`client_auth` block, the `htpasswd` block, or a combination of these authentication methods.

#### Use username and password (Deprecated)

This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a single
username and password combination:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  username = "demo"
  password = sys.env("API_KEY")
}
```

> #### Use client authentication

Reviewer 2: I think pairing them together would be better, but similar to the other thread I'm not a fan of showing deprecated fields in config examples in most cases. Let's see what our docs team says.

file containing the users to use for basic auth:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    file = "/etc/alloy/.htpasswd"
  }
}
```

#### Use htpasswd inline content

This example shows how to specify htpasswd content directly in the configuration:

```alloy
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
    
    auth = otelcol.auth.basic.creds.handler
  }
  
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.debug.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.debug "default" {}

otelcol.auth.basic "creds" {
  htpasswd {
    inline = "user1:password1\nuser2:password2"
  }
}
```

#### Combination of htpasswd and the username and password attributes

> This example configures [`otelcol.receiver.otlp`][otelcol.receiver.otlp] to use basic authentication using a combination

Author: @clayton-cornell what do you think about this? I don't have any strong feelings regardless but I would really like for this to be in a future release since I would like to reduce the components I have to support in production (and the actual hops the requests take).
